Increased carbon emissions and the potential planetary trauma that is looming as a result of the Anthropocene, have urged the globe to push all sectors, especially the building sector which accounts for more than a third of the world's carbon emissions, to find new approaches that help in attaining "Global Circular Economy". DFD, which focuses primarily on material information in the form of MP, is the recent approach that has been garnering traction to bring this vision to reality. The reason is a notional shift from project to system management and treatment of materials as active entities which is synonymous with the “New Materiality” theory. The same theory which suggests the requirement of catalysts for bringing the virtual tendencies/ capacities associated with the physical material to reality brings the focus to Digital Twins, a term that has been doing the rounds as part of the Industrial Revolution 4.0. The research, by taking cues from the already established theories and approaches, proposes MP 2.0 which augments the DFD strategy and integrates it with the Digital Twin technology to solve a part of the "Global Circular Economy" puzzle. “Material Strategies” by translating DFD strategies are established and the parameters associated with them while working across systems are depicted via a correlation matrix in the paper. A case scenario between two systems is shown to depict the complexity that arises when these parameters are interjected. Industrial Revolution 4.0 which is marked by CPS comes to aid this complexity. It requires cross-communication across machines and since the role of humans becomes secondary, data interoperability becomes the most crucial step for exchanging information across the systems. The research suggests JSON as a better alternative in comparison to XML for this purpose. It has proven to be computationally sustainable in handling and parsing complex data. In the process of establishing the parameters associated with “Material strategies”, the paper also highlights why the past attempts that either focus on BIM (the backbone of Digital twins) or GIS need integration. The research attempts to create a JSON prototype addressing all these findings. MP 2.0 which is ever evolving with new materials and information, not only the material circularity is restored but also the carbon emissions are reduced that are involved as a part of this exchange of materials across systems. It is an information and knowledge framework for urban ecology that extends the capability of an existing MP i.e., from a building to consider the earth as a mega building project. It envisions a transformed construction industry where the eternal essence of materials coexists within the transient urban ecosystem something which closely resembles the principle of nature where one system’s trash becomes feed for another.
